Draft of the blog post about Core Solidity (#225)
argotorg/solcore: blog-post/blog-post.md

Reviewer: Code could use some cleanup too. It has a lot of style issues that make it look a bit sloppy.
- Random whitespace:
    - `(x1,y1), (x2, y2)` -> `(x1, y1), (x2, y2)`
    - `(address, address,address,word)` -> `(address, address, address, word)`
    - `word ;` -> `word;`
    - `Native (` -> `Native(`, `map (` -> `map(`
    - `enum PaymentType { NATIVE, ERC20, ERC721 }` -> `enum PaymentType {NATIVE, ERC20, ERC721}`
- Random indents.
    - Sometimes 2 spaces, sometimes 4. Please stick to our general convention of 4 spaces everywhere.
    - Sometimes even weirder, dependent on previous line:
        ```
        bool transferSuccess = (newFromBalance == fromBalance - amount) && 
                               (newToBalance == balances[to] + amount);
        ```
        ->
        ```
        bool transferSuccess =
            (newFromBalance == fromBalance - amount) && 
            (newToBalance == balances[to] + amount);
        ```
    - or double size for no reason:
        ```
        |   NotStarted(reserve) => 
                require(msg.value >= reserve);
                return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
        ```
        ->
        ```
        | NotStarted(reserve) => 
            require(msg.value >= reserve);
            return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
        ```

Author: Some were fixed and some were removed by other changes.

type classes.

Generics enable parametric polymorphism through type parameters, which allows the  
implementation of algorithms and data structures that operate uniformly across 
over all types. As an example, we could define a polymorphic `identity` function:

``` 
forall a . function identity(x : a) -> a {
   return x;
}
```

While generic functions are interesting, most interesting operations are not defined 
at all types. Overloading allows the definition of code which can operate in distinct 
ways at different types. Type classes are the standard way of combining overloading and 
parametric polymorphism (generics) in a systematic manner. A type class definition 
declares the class name, its arguments and member functions type signature. As an 
example, let's consider the task of defining addition over different types:
```
function a . class a : Sum {
  function sum (x : a, y : a) -> a;
}
```
Implementations for member functions for different types are provided by instance 
definitions. As an example, let's consider the implementation of `Sum` for 
`word` type which, internally, uses Yul assembly to perform addition. 
```
instance word : Sum {

>   function sum (x : word, y : word) -> word {

Reviewer: The first comment does not seem to have been addressed, but you also did not say if you disagree about it.

>   function sum (x : word, y : word) -> word {

Reviewer: We discussed this extensively on the chat. Here I'll just note that we decided to replace the example with `console.log()`.

Instead of fixing its deficiencies, Core Solidity will rely on pattern matching against error 
objects to provide explicit error handling that address all the corner cases `try`/`catch` 
misses.

- A better high-level `delegatecall` mechanism: While not final, traditional libraries are likely 
to be replaced. Free functions and modules can adequately replace internal library functions. We 
are designing a new, first-class mechanism for splitting contracts and connecting pieces via 
`delegatecall` to replace the role of external libraries.

- A community-driven standard library: An overarching goal of Core Solidity is to have a
simple, flexible language core, with much of the current built-in functionality defined 
in-language as a standard library. Currently, extending the compiler is a complex task that 
doesn't fully leverage the wealth of  knowledge within our application developer community. 
We aim to establish a community-driven, EIP-style process for the standard library, 
encouraging extensions to be developed this way. Whether this library remains a minimal set 
of utilities or grows into a full-featured toolkit will be decided by the community through 

> this process.

Reviewer: It still looks the same as before. I don't think this was actually addressed.

> this process.

Reviewer: Can you also list some examples of those type classes and functions?

> this process.

Reviewer: I see that the whole section is gone now. The text also mention some future posts - is the plan to write about it later or to just not go into detail about it?

# Introducing Core Solidity

Solidity earned its place as the de facto language for smart contracts by 
prioritizing developer experience. Since its initial design, it favored 
high-level abstractions which are well-known by programmers.
While safety was always a goal, it was the history of contract exploits that 
forged it over the years. This focus on security transformed Solidity, making 
it stricter over time. These necessary changes, however, came with consequences. 
The language now exhibits the scars of its accumulated complexity and a type system 
that has become a barrier to its own evolution. Foundational features like 
generics (aka parametric polymorphism) remain out of reach, as integrating them 
into the current architecture is both difficult and dangerously prone to 
introduce critical flaws.

Aiming to break this impasse, the Argot collective decided to embark on a 
fundamental rebuild, which is named Core Solidity: a project to define a new, 
foundational version of the language designed for security, clarity, and 
future growth from the ground up.

> ## What is Core Solidity?

Reviewer: Looks like the post no longer mentions SAIL. IMO we should say here that this is what we're describing. And later also way which bits are just syntax sugar or stdlib.

Classic Solidity. Since our initial concern is to develop the new language type 
system and its semantics, its surface syntax would probably change in the near 
future.

### Generics and Type Classes

Core Solidity will introduce two new exciting abstraction mechanisms: generics and 
type classes.

Generics enable parametric polymorphism through type parameters, which allows the  
implementation of algorithms and data structures that operate uniformly across 
all types. As an example, we could define a polymorphic `identity` function:

``` 
forall T . function identity(x : T) -> T {
  return x;
}
```

While generic functions are interesting, most interesting operations are not defined 
at all types. Overloading allows the definition of code which can operate in distinct 
ways at different types. Type classes are the standard way of combining overloading and 
parametric polymorphism (generics) in a systematic manner. A type class definition 
declares the class name, its arguments and member functions type signature. As an 
example, let's consider the task of defining addition over different types:

```
forall T . class T : Sum {

>   function sum (x : T, y : T) -> T;

Author: Fixed.

```

Implementations for member functions for different types are provided by instance 
definitions. As an example, let's consider the implementation of `Sum` for 

> `word` type which, internally, uses Yul assembly to perform addition. 

Reviewer: I think a large part of our audience will be unfamiliar with the term "instance" in this context. Perhaps we could add an extra sentence explaining that it's simply a specialization of the class?

Maybe even that it's the equivalent of `impl` in Rust. In the same vein we could say that a type class is the equivalent of `trait`.

Reviewer: The `word` type is also something could use a short explanation. We don't have it in Classic Solidity and I don't think people will intuitively grasp what it is and how it relates to the integer types.

Reviewer 2: > I think a large part of our audience will be unfamiliar with the term "instance" in this context. Perhaps we could add an extra sentence explaining that it's simply a specialization of a type class?
> 
> Maybe even that it's the equivalent of `impl` in Rust. In the same vein we could say that a type class is the equivalent of `trait`.

We are planning on purging these haskellisms entirely and probably just going with `trait` / `impl` since it's more widely used and less overloaded than `typeclass`. I don't think we will have time to do that before shipping this blog though, so will just for now have to live with the mess and make as clear as possible in the post that traits are typeclasses and instances are impls.

```
instance word : Sum {
  function sum (x : word, y : word) -> word {
    let res : word ;
    assembly {
      res := add(x,y);
    }
    return res;
  }
}
```

As another example, consider an instance for polymorphic pairs.

```
forall T1 T2 . T1 : Sum, T2 : Sum => instance (T1,T2) : Sum {
  function sum (p1 : (T1,T2), p2 : (T1,T2)) -> (T1, T2) {
    match p1, p2 {
      (x1,y1), (x2, y2) => 
        return (Sum.sum(x1,x2), Sum.sum(y1,y2));
    }
  }
}
```
The previous definition shows that, whenever we have instances of 

> class `Sum` for types `a` and `b`, then we can also use function 

Reviewer: I think you mean `instance (T1,T2) : Sum` here? Current phrasing makes it sound like you're referring to `instance word : Sum` instead.

You also forgot to update the variable names here.

```suggestion
The above definition shows that, whenever we have instances of 
class `Sum` for types `T1` and `T2`, then we can also use function 
```

Reviewer: Only partially. `previous definition` is still there.

`Sum.sum` on pairs of such types. The reader must noticed that
in order to access the pair components we use **pattern matching**, 
another feature which will be part of the Core Solidity.

### Algebraic data types and pattern matching 

Algebraic Data Types provide a way of modeling data modeling using sum types 
(disjoint unions) and product types (structural records). This enables the construction of 
precise types where invalid states are **unrepresentable** by design, thereby enhancing program 
correctness through the type system itself. As an example, consider the following type 
definition for an auction state. 

```
data AuctionState =
    NotStarted (word) 
  | Active (word, address) 
  | Ended (word, address) 
  | Cancelled;

> 

Reviewer: Wrapping this definition like this makes `|` look just like some arbitrary syntax decoration (as in `match`) rather than the sum operator. Putting it on a single line would makes it much clearer IMO:

```suggestion
data AuctionState =
    NotStarted(word) | Active(word, address) | Ended(word, address) | Cancelled;
``` 

Also, you have some stray empty line here.

            require(msg.value > currentBid);
            transferFunds(bidder, currentBid); 
            return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    |   Cancelled => {
            revert();
        }
    |   _ => {
            return state;
        }
    }
}
```

### High-order functions

Functions possess first-class status within the type system, enabling their use
as parameters, return values, and assignable entities. This facilitates the
implementation of higher-order functions and functional composition patterns,
enhancing language expressivity.
As an example of a high-order function signature, let's consider `map` 
which applies a given function to all elements of an memory array

```
forall T U . function map (input : memory(array(T)), transform : (T) -> U) -> memory(array(U))
```

Function `map` receives a memory array formed by elements of type `T` and a function which 
takes a value of type `T` and returns a `U` value. Notation `(T) -> U` represents the 
type of functions which has a `T` argument and a `U` result. 
High-order functions allow the elegant encoding of data structure manipulation as 
polymorphic high-order functions, which enables more code reuse and less 

> testing effort.

Reviewer: Also, not sure about the claim about testing. In my experience code full of callbacks actually takes more effort to properly test.

    
    uint256 newFromBalance = balances[from];
    uint256 newToBalance = balances[to];
    
    bool transferSuccess = (newFromBalance == fromBalance - amount) && 
                          (newToBalance == balances[to] + amount);
    
    return transferSuccess;
}
```

All local variables and function arguments and result needs to specify 
its type. In Core Solidity, thanks to type inference, we could have
completely omit type annotations, while keeping the guarantees about 
the code type safety.

```
function transferTokens(from, to, amount) {
    fromBalance = balances[from];
    require(fromBalance >= amount);
    
    balances[from] = fromBalance - amount;
    balances[to] = balances[to] + amount;
    
    newFromBalance = balances[from];
    newToBalance = balances[to];
    
    transferSuccess = (newFromBalance == fromBalance - amount) && 
                      (newToBalance == balances[to] + amount);
}
```

## Extended example: Classic Solidity vs Core Solidity 

Now, let's consider an extended example: a contract which implements a unified payment 
processor that handles three different token standards. The complete Classic Solidity 

> implementation for this simple contract can be found [here.](https://gist.github.com/rodrigogribeiro/7cee270702987fe123921fdbbc2f12ff)

Reviewer: Really? I thought it was actually very compelling. I liked it a lot because it showed how more precise types can eliminate the need for repetitive checks.

The exact checks you used did have some issues and maybe could be replaced with better ones, but the overall concept was IMO a very good..

The code starts by defining a `Payment` struct attempts to represent all three token standards, 
using the `paymentType` field as a runtime discriminator to determine which fields are relevant 
for each case.

```
enum PaymentType { NATIVE, ERC20, ERC721 }

struct Payment {
    PaymentType paymentType;  // Runtime type tag
    address token;           // Used for ERC20/ERC721, must be zero for Native 
    address from;            // Sender address  
    address to;              // Receiver address
    uint256 amount;          // Used for Native/ERC20, must be 1 for ERC721
    uint256 tokenId;         // Used for ERC721, must be zero for others
}
```

Next, functions `processPayment` and `calculateFee` uses explicit if/else chains 
to manually check the `paymentType` and route to the appropriate handling logic.
Also, in order to avoid invalid states, the code use `require` to ensure that 
each case is dealing with a proper payment state value.

```
function processPayment(Payment calldata payment) external {
  if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.NATIVE) {
    require(payment.token == address(0), "Native: no token");

>     require(payment.amount > 0, "Native: amount required");

Reviewer: The Core Solidity version allows `amount == 0`. You should either allow it here or add the same check there. Otherwise the examples are not fully equivalent.

Same for `ERC20`.

Reviewer 2: this section is gone now

    require(payment.tokenId == 0, "Native: no tokenId");

>     payable(payment.to).transfer(payment.amount);

Author: > `transfer()` is generally frowned upon these days (see [Stop Using Solidity's transfer() Now](https://diligence.consensys.io/blog/2019/09/stop-using-soliditys-transfer-now/)) and we're in the process of deprecating it.
> 
> Better to use `call()` when we're presenting code to people.

Following the blog post link suggestion, I've changed the last line to:

```
payable(payment.to).call.value(payment.amount)("");
```

>     payable(payment.to).transfer(payment.amount);

Author: Fixed. Replaced the problematic call to `payable(payment.to).call{value: payment.amount}("")`.

  } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC20) {
    require(payment.token != address(0), "ERC20: token required");
    require(payment.amount > 0, "ERC20: amount required");
    require(payment.tokenId == 0, "ERC20: no tokenId");
    IERC20(payment.token).transferFrom(payment.from, payment.to, payment.amount);
  } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC721) {
    require(payment.token != address(0), "ERC721: token required");
    require(payment.amount == 1, "ERC721: amount must be 1");
    require(payment.tokenId > 0, "ERC721: tokenId required");
    IERC721(payment.token).transferFrom(payment.from, payment.to, payment.tokenId);
  }
}
```

Now, let's turn our attention to the encoding of this example in Core Solidity.

> The complete encoding of this example can be found [here](). 

Reviewer: Missing link. Is the example ready?

Reviewer: BTW, I don't think "encoding" is the right word here. It sounds weird in this context.

First, we start by defining an algebraic data type which represents each payment 
type by a separate data constructor with precisely the fields required for that 
specific standard. This makes invalid states **unrepresentable** by design. As an
example, you cannot create a `Native` payment with a token field or an `ERC721` 
payment with an amount field.

```
data Payment =
    Native (address,word)
  | ERC20 (address,address,address,word)  

>   | ERC721(address, address,address,word)

Reviewer: Are these parameters always unnamed in Core Solidity? If you cannot name them then it seems like a bit of a downgrade compared to a struct.

Author: Fixed by adding the `tokenid`data type.

```

The implementation of functions `processPayment` and `calculateFee` can be made 
much simpler by using pattern matching:

```
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to,amount) => 
      transfer(to,amount);
    | ERC20(token,from,to,amount) =>
      transferFromERC20(from, to, amount);
    | ERC721(token,from,to,tokenId) =>
      transferFromERC721(from, to, tokenId);
    }
}
```

Another effect of the use of pattern matching / algebraic data types is that, 
since it is not possible to represent invalid states, no runtime validation 
using `require` is necessary, since they are enforced by Core Solidity type system.

In this short example, we can see how Core Solidity gives the developer the tools 
to write shorter and safer code. By using algebraic data types and pattern matching, 
we can avoid the manipulation of invalid states and the need of runtime validations 
using `require`. Also, parametric polymorphism (a.k.a. generics) and type classes 
opens up new possibilities for the development of safer libraries for the modular 

> development of smart-contracts.

Reviewer 2: this section is removed now.

## Current status 

Core Solidity prototype is being actively developed by Argot's Programming Languages 

> Research team and it currently supports the following features: 

Reviewer: I see you have a whole section on making it production ready. Let's say that resolves the part about the prototype.

- Definition of algebraic data types, pattern matching, type classes and polymorphic functions. 

- Data Locations represented as types: Data locations (e.g., storage, memory) 
are now just standard library types. This enables the creation of composite 
types with  mixed locations, such as `Broker` type which holds references to storage 
arrays and memory data, as presented in the next code piece:

```
data Broker = Broker (memory(word), storage(array(address, word)))

> ```

Author: Fixed the indentation of code and bullets.

- Classic Solidity compatible ABI encoding / decoding, mappings and contract constructors.

> Using these features, we can implement a [ERC20 contract in Core Solidity]() which is similar 

Reviewer: Was this meant to link to `erc20.solc`?
```suggestion
Using these features, we can implement an [ERC20 contract in Core Solidity](erc20.solc) which is similar 
```

> to the Classic Solidity version.

Reviewer: BTW, do we really want to introduce a new extension for Core Solidity code? I was assuming we'd keep using `.sol`.

fundamental rebuild, which is named Core Solidity: a project to define a new, 
foundational version of the language designed for security, clarity, and 
future growth from the ground up.

## What is Core Solidity?

The design of Core Solidity took inspiration from well established concepts from 
functional programming, with Haskell serving as a primary influence, while 
incorporating rigorous safety guarantees inspired by modern systems programming 
languages such as Rust. Although this architectural direction represents a 
significant evolution, it keeps the domain-specific requirements of smart 
contract development, preserving the established conventions and practical 
utility of Classic Solidity where appropriate.

The language's theoretical foundation comprises several formally-specified 
features that provide enhanced type safety and expressivity. In what follows, we 
provide an overview of such features. However, we warn the reader that the current 
Core Solidity prototype uses a syntax for these new features that will probably 
change in the near future, aiming to improve readability and ergonomics of the 
new language.  

### Generics and type classes

> Core Solidity will introduce two new exciting abstraction mechanisms: generics and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Core Solidity introduces two new exciting abstraction mechanisms: generics and 
```

case analysis. This ensures all possible variants are handled explicitly, eliminating 
partial function hazards and providing formal guarantees of match completeness.

```
function processAuction(state) {
    match state {
    | NotStarted(reserve) => 
        require(msg.value >= reserve);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Active(currentBid, bidder) => 
        require(msg.value > currentBid);
        transferFunds(bidder, currentBid); 
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Cancelled =>
        revert();
    |   _ =>
        return state;
    }
}
```

### High-order functions

Functions possess first-class status within the type system, enabling their use
as parameters, return values, and assignable entities. This facilitates the
implementation of higher-order functions and functional composition patterns,
enhancing language expressivity. 

As an example of a high-order function, let's consider `map_pair` 
that takes two functions and applies them to the corresponding 
components of a pair:

```
forall T1 T2 U1 U2 . function map_pair (pair : (T1, T2), first : (T1) -> U1, second: (T2) -> U2) -> (T2,U2) {
    match pair {
    | (t1,t2) => 

>         return (first(t1), second(t2));

Author: Fixed by renaming them to `f1` and `f2`.

    }
}
```

### Type inference

Core Solidity uses type inference algorithm to reduce syntactic verbosity while 
maintaining the strong static typing guarantees. The type inference occurs 
during compilation and provides complete type safety without explicit annotations.
As an example, consider the following code snippet that implements a transfer 
function in Classic Solidity:

```
function transferTokens(
    address from,
    address to,
    uint256 amount
) public returns (bool) {
    uint256 fromBalance = balances[from];
    require(fromBalance >= amount, "Insufficient balance");
    
    balances[from] = fromBalance - amount;
    balances[to] = balances[to] + amount;
    
    uint256 newFromBalance = balances[from];
    uint256 newToBalance = balances[to];
    
    bool transferSuccess = (newFromBalance == fromBalance - amount) && 
                           (newToBalance == balances[to] + amount);
    
    return transferSuccess;
}
```

All local variables and function arguments and result needs to specify 
their type. In Core Solidity, thanks to type inference, we could 
completely omit type annotations, while keeping the guarantees about 
the code type safety.

```

> function transferTokens(from, to, amount) {

Reviewer: Note that in the Classic Solidity version `finalBalance` and `totalChanges` are return variables, not locals. I'd make them locals in both to make examples equivalent.

> function transferTokens(from, to, amount) {

Author: Removed the return variables in favor of local variables, as suggested by @cameel .

>     fromBalance = balances[from];

Reviewer 3: is `fromBalance` a local var? Then this requires a `let`, does it not?

Author: Yes! I forgot to add the let keyword. Thanks for noticing. Now, I changed the example and it now typechecks correctly on branch `annotation-tests`.

Solidity as much as possible. For any new syntax, you should expect that the final version will feel
closer to more familiar languages like TypeScript or Rust than it does right now.

We made the decision to share before we have a finalized syntax because we are both excited to
share our progress, and wish to gather feedback sooner rather than later.

## New Language Features

Core Solidity takes ideas from pure functional programming languages (e.g. Haskell, Lean), as well
as modern systems languages (e.g. Rust, Zig). The core new features that we plan to add are:

- Generics / parametric polymorphism
- Traits / typeclasses
- Algebraic datatypes (a.k.a sum / product types) and pattern matching
- Higher order functions
- Type inference
- Compile time evaluation

We think that taken together these core primitives will enable developers to produce stronger
abstractions, write more modular and reusable code, leverage the type system to enforce core
safety properties.

We will continue to support the kind of low level access to the EVM that is often required by
production implementations: assembly will remain a core primitive, and we will support calling

> functions from the high level language in assembly directly. Users will be able to disable the built

Reviewer: Calling functions from high-level language in assembly is not something you can currently do in Classic Solidity, so IMO it should be presented as a new feature. Right now it sounds as if it was already in and you just planned to keep it.

`Sum.sum` on pairs of such types.
The reader should note that the last two examples use **pattern matching**
to extract components of user defined algebraic types, which are
another feature that will be part of Core Solidity.

### Algebraic data types and pattern matching

Algebraic Data Types provide a way of data modeling using sum types
(disjoint unions) and product types (structural records). This enables the construction of
precise types where invalid states are **unrepresentable** by design, thereby enhancing program
correctness through the type system itself. As an example, consider the following type
definition for an auction state.

```
data AuctionState =
    NotStarted (word)
  | Active (word, address)
  | Ended (word, address)
  | Cancelled;

```
The type has three constructors: `NotStarted` specifies that the action have not started yet and
stores its reserved price, `Active` denotes that the auction has began and it stores the
current highest bid and the address that made such bid, `Ended` represents that the auction has
finished with success and it holds the highest bid and the winner address and constructor

> `Cancelled` is used when the auction has been cancelled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type has three constructors: `NotStarted` specifies that the auction has not started yet and
stores its reserved price, `Active` denotes that the auction has begun and it stores the
current highest bid and the address that made such bid, `Ended` represents that the auction has
finished with success and it holds the highest bid and the winner address and constructor,
`Cancelled` is used when the auction has been cancelled.
```

Reviewer: There is also one more mistyped `auction` below:
- `update the action state` -> `update the auction state`

  | ERC721(address, address, address, tokenid);
```

The implementation of functions `processPayment` and `calculateFee` can be made
much simpler by using pattern matching:

```
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to,amount) =>
        transfer(to,amount);
    | ERC20(token,from,to,amount) =>
        transferFromERC20(from, to, amount);
    | ERC721(token,from,to,tokenId) =>
        transferFromERC721(from, to, tokenId);
    }
}
```

Another effect of the use of pattern matching / algebraic data types is that,
since it is not possible to represent invalid states, no runtime validations
using `require` is necessary, since they are enforced by Core Solidity type system.

In this short example, we can see how Core Solidity gives the developer the tools
to write shorter and safer code. By using algebraic data types and pattern matching,
we can avoid the manipulation of invalid states and the need of runtime validations
using `require`. Also, parametric polymorphism (a.k.a. generics) and type classes
open up new possibilities for the development of safer libraries for the modular
development of smart-contracts.

> ### Compile Time Evaluation

Reviewer: This is now a subsection of `Extended example: Classic Solidity vs Core Solidity`, but does not seem connected to it. Shouldn't it be a separate one?

Reviewer: We also have a small bit on compile-time evaluation under `What's next?`. I think we should merge the two.

I actually wanted to comment on that one to clarify that compile-time evaluation is an idea that we had much earlier and didn't come from Zig. What came from Zig are some specific ideas on how it could work, but those also mostly match what we were planning anyway.

While not yet implemented, we are planning to add a robust system for compile time evaluation. We
expect to support at least the compile time evaluation of pure expressions that do not require
access to memory. Some key design questions that remain open relate to the degree to which we will
support access to memory at compile time, the need for compile time specific primitives (e.g. string
concatenation / hashing), as well as the need for reflection.

We want to make sure the needs of the community are met here. Please feel free to reach out to use

> on Github / The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for

Reviewer: Also, not sure I would mention Github here (assuming you mean solc issues). I'd direct general design discussions to the forum first. Only encourage people to open issues when the idea becomes a more concrete task.

I also wanted to suggest to create a forum topic specifically for this post, just like we did for the roadmap post. Perhaps it would be best to just direct people to comment there.

> on Github / The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for

Author: Removed the mention of Github, keeping only the Solidity forum.

> on Github / The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for

Reviewer: This is how it looks now:

> Please feel free to reach out The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for this feature.

I think it still needs some adjustment. Should probably be `reach us at The Solidity Forum`. It's also missing links. We can already put in the one to the channel. The thread does not exist yet, but I'd leave a placeholder so that we don't forget to update.

> on Github / The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for

Reviewer 2: I updated the wording again here to remove reference to specific feedback channels.

```

- Classic Solidity compatible ABI encoding / decoding, mappings and contract constructors.

Using these features, we can implement a simple [ERC20 contract in Core Solidity](erc20.sol).

## Compatibility and Interoperability

Introducing such a major revision to any programming language is challenging. While a certain degree
of breakage is inevitable (and even desired), we want to make the transition as smooth as possible
and avoid a split in the language.

We intend to keep the syntax breakage as small as possible, and expect to make significant
alterations to the current prototype to bring syntax much more in line with Classic Solidity.

As with previous breaking upgrades to Solidity, ABI compatibility will be maintained between
versions, allowing individual contracts written in incompatible versions to interoperate and live
side by side in the same project (this strategy is also used by Rust with their "Editions" feature).
Thanks to our history of releasing breaking changes, much of the ecosystem tooling already supports
multiple incompatible language versions in the same project (TODO: check and confirm the state of

> things in foundry / hardhat).

Author: I'll like to remove the TODO and keep the text as it is. Do you think that we need to add links to the hardhat docs explaining the support to multiple language versions?

> things in foundry / hardhat).

Author: Also valid for `foundry`: [check here](https://getfoundry.sh/config/reference/solidity-compiler#auto_detect_solc)

> things in foundry / hardhat).

Reviewer: TBH it may be simplest to just not mention it. Our interoperability mechanism will not depend on frameworks supporting compilation with multiple versions of solc. Each version of solc will just be able to compile both languages.

> things in foundry / hardhat).

Reviewer 2: I removed mention of this entirely.

We are also investigating the feasibility of deeper interoperability beyond just the contract ABI.
We expect that it will be possible to share at least free functions and interface definitions
between language versions. We will write more concretely on this topic when we have detailed designs

> or working prototypes to share.

Reviewer: I mean, we will also publish the blog post about the transition so we will share a bit more detail even before then. It won't be a detailed design of course, but still.

Avoiding a python2 -> python3 style split is top of mind, and we believe that upgrades should be
manageable and that it will be possible to carry them out in an incremental manner

### Syntax Breakage

The syntax you see in the examples here contains quite some differences from Classic Solidity. As
already mentioned, we expect to bring most of the Core syntax inline with the existing Classic
syntax. After quite some internal discussion and considering user feedback, the current feeling
within the team is that we would prefer to prioritize smoothing the transition over introducing

> (subjectively) cleaner syntax.

Reviewer 2: Ah ok, sounds like we need more discussion here. Do you have an alternative formulation that you think more accurately reflects the state of things? I guess that for clarity my strong position at this time is that we should avoid breaking syntax unless we have very good and clear reasons to do so. Given the amount of existing code written in the classic syntax (not to mention the mountain of blog posts / tutorials), the cost of any syntax change is pretty high.

> (subjectively) cleaner syntax.

Reviewer: I'd say that this part is still very much in flux, so we should not strongly commit to either for now. Better to err on the side of not overpromising in term of keeping things backwards-compatible.

I mean, the way you worded it is maybe fine, since you are not really promising anything, just stating how you read the current sentiment in the team. I mostly wanted to point out that we still don't really have agreement on that. I suspect that we'll end up somewhere in the middle - there are some things I'm strongly convinced we should change, but if you push towards compatibility, we will likely end up doing that in much fewer cases than we would have otherwise.

established features have successfully powered the ecosystem, certain patterns have
revealed limitations in scalability, security, and clarity. This blog post outlines
Argot Collective's vision for Core Solidity, a deliberate re-design of the language's
foundation. This initiative aims to replace legacy mechanisms with more robust,
composable, and community-driven primitives, ensuring the language remains a secure
and efficient basis for the next generation of smart contracts.

Our next steps will involve:

- Type aliases and definitions: Currently the Core Solidity prototype do not support
  the definition of type aliases and structs.

- Inheritance replacement: While a basic building block of Classic Solidity, inheritance has
  often failed as a clean code reuse mechanism. Type classes are our intended, more robust and
  composable replacement in the new language.

- No more `try`/`catch`: The `try`/`catch` construct has always been problematic in Solidity.
  Instead of fixing its deficiencies, Core Solidity will rely on pattern matching against error
  objects to provide explicit error handling that address all the corner cases `try`/`catch`
  misses.

> - A better high-level `delegatecall` mechanism: While not final, traditional libraries are likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A better high-level `delegatecall` mechanism: While the decision is not final yet, traditional libraries are likely
```

  to be replaced. Free functions and modules can adequately replace internal library functions. We
  are designing a new, first-class mechanism for splitting contracts and connecting pieces via

>   `delegatecall` to replace the role of external libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A better high-level `delegatecall` mechanism: While the decision is not final yet, traditional libraries are likely
  to be replaced. Free functions and modules can adequately replace internal library functions. We
  also intend to design a new, first-class mechanism for splitting contracts and connecting pieces via
  `delegatecall` to replace the role of external libraries.
```

- A community-driven standard library: An overarching goal of Core Solidity is to have a
  simple, flexible language core, with much of the current built-in functionality defined
  in-language as part of the standard library. Currently, we have a prototype standard library
  which has type class-based constructions for the representation of mappings, ABI encoding/decoding
  and dispatch. Features like arbitrary arrays and slices over them will be implemented as

>   part of this prototype library.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to clarify that in the post. Mentioning it as a library feature will make people think that you will be able to define the semantics of `array[x:y]` in there.

Though maybe that will become clear once we have a section on desugaring.

term benefits for ecosystem security.

In addition we are considering changes to some core language features that we currently consider
problematic or unsatisfying, in particular: Libraries, Try/Catch, and Function Pointers. Input or
feedback on the ways in which these features do or do not work for you is interesting and very
welcome. We will publish more on this area once we have concrete plans and implementations to share.

## What's next?

The evolution of Solidity has reached a crucial moment. While the language's
established features have successfully powered the ecosystem, certain patterns have
revealed limitations in scalability, security, and clarity. This blog post outlines
Argot Collective's vision for Core Solidity, a deliberate re-design of the language's
foundation. This initiative aims to replace legacy mechanisms with more robust,
composable, and community-driven primitives, ensuring the language remains a secure
and efficient basis for the next generation of smart contracts.

Our next steps will involve:

- Type aliases and definitions: Currently the Core Solidity prototype do not support

>   the definition of type aliases and structs.

Reviewer: This bit mixes the things that are "next" for the prototype with things that will change in the language. I think we should make a clear distinction between the two.

IMO we should focus on the language here and put stuff about solcore in `Current status`.

Structs are already available in Classic so adding them is only a change for the prototype, not for the language. On the other hand Classic does not have type aliases, so that is relevant here. We might want to make the distinction between aliases and the types defined with `data` though.

Reviewer: In the same vein, there's this bit in the intro:

> but we want to add at least compile time evaluation and modules.

We already have modules in Classic Solidity and the goal is more to bring solcore to parity with them than invent something new. So I'd classify that as a prototype change.

Reviewer: What might be better to focus on instead is some kind of namespacing mechanism other than modules. I'm not sure if that being tied to modules is the best design choice. In Classic that need is filled by libraries. If they get removed, the lack of more fine-grained namespacing leaves a bit of a hole.

Another thing to consider are exports: https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/issues/6482

Reviewer 2: Exports and namespacing are both features that I think we should support. I agree that namespacing is to some degree orthogonal to modules. I also suspect that the right place to end up design wise is something that is broadly very similar to the current module system, potentially with a few tweaks and upgrades to allow for implementation hiding and stronger abstraction boundaries.

I'm not sure I understand your problem with the current text tbh. Would it help to state that compatibility with the classic module system is a goal? Or that we do not expect a broad divergence from the classic system? The new language simply does not yet have a module system, and we need one before we can consider the typesystem stable, so I think the statement that we intend to add one is correct?

secures hundreds of billions of dollars of value. We are proud of this success, and its track
record of secure code generation. Users of Solidity will however be keenly aware of some of its
limitations. The type system often lacks the expressiveness to produce reusable library code or
enforce core safety properties. The language has very limited capabilities around compile time
evaluation. Many features are implemented in an inconsistent manner, or do not always work as
expected.

Fixing these limitations within the current implementation has proven difficult. Upgrades must be
made in a somewhat ad-hoc manner, and each new feature addition makes reasoning about the
correctness of subsequent features more difficult. We did not feel confident that we would be able
to safely extend the language in this way to add the kind of features that our users were asking
for, and that we feel are required to keep up with the ever increasing scale of systems that are
being developed in Solidity.

Core Solidity is our solution. It is a rebuild of the Solidity type system and compiler front/middle
end that will:

> - introduce powerful new features (generics, traits, algebraic datatypes, pattern matching, comptime)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- introduce powerful new features (generics, traits, algebraic datatypes, pattern matching, compile-time constant evaluation)
```

Unless you want to make "comptime" our official terminology (which I would not be against - I like things having unambiguous names). But AFAIK right now it's just a Zig term and not something used more widely.

to `impl` in Rust.

A type class definition declares the class name, its arguments and member functions type
signatures. As example, let's consider the following definition of a class for the ABI
encoding of types:

```
forall self . class self:ABIEncode {
    function encodeInto(x:self, basePtr:word, offset:word, tail:word) -> word;
}
```

Function `encodeInto` encodes a value of type `self` into a memory region starting at
`basePtr`. Argument `offset` denotes the position of the first empty byte of the head
and `tail` which gives the position of the first empty byte of the tail. The
implementation of encoding for a specific type is done in an instance declaration.
As an example, the following instance definition implements the ABI encoding for
`uint256` type, which is represented as an algebraic type that holds a `word` value.

```
data uint256 = uint256(word);
instance uint256:ABIEncode {
    function encodeInto(x:uint256, basePtr:word, offset:word, tail:word) -> word {
        let repx : word = Typedef.rep(x);
        assembly { mstore(add(basePtr, offset), repx) }
        return tail;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: - This explains parameters, but does not say that the return value is (and it is unnamed).
- Both `offset` and `tail` are relative positions, right? I'd say that explicitly.
- Wouldn't `head` be a better name for `offset`? In the context of encoding I usually associate "offset" with the tail offset, so naming here is not really intuitive.

encoding for the value being logged and then perform a static call to
the console address. All these one argument functions definitions can
be reduced to following single function, which uses the standard library
machinery for ABI encoding of values.

```
forall ty . ty : ABIAttribs, ty : ABIEncode => function log(val : ty) {
    let CONSOLE_ADDRESS : word = 0x000000000000000000636F6e736F6c652e6c6f67;
    let payload = abi_encode(val);

    // extract the underlying word representation of the payload
    let ptr = Typedef.rep(payload);

    assembly {
        pop(
            staticcall(
                gas(),
                CONSOLE_ADDRESS,
                add(ptr, 32),
                mload(ptr),
                0,
                0
            )
        )
    }
}
```

Another short possible implementation which relies on EVM `log1` instruction,
instead of Foundry console address, would be:

```
forall t . t : Typedef(word) => function log1(v : t, topic : word) -> () {
    let w : word = Typedef.rep(v);
    assembly {
        mstore(0,w)
        log1(0,32,topic)
    }
}
```

This version uses standard library class `Typedef`, which provides functions for

> the conversion between `word` and types which are instance of this class.

Reviewer: I think it would be helpful to point out that `t : Typedef(word)` puts a constraint on which types can be used (so that only ones that actually have `word` representation will not produce an error). Similarly in the encoding example I'd mention that it's limited to ABI-encodable types.

Reviewer 2: ABI encoding is removed from this section and now lives in the section on SAIL. I kept console.log and added Typedef to this section since it was needed for console.log.

stores its reserved price, `Active` denotes that the auction has begun and it stores the
current highest bid and the address that made such bid, `Ended` represents that the auction has
finished with success and it holds the highest bid and the winner address and constructor,
`Cancelled` is used when the auction has been cancelled.

Using algebraic data types, we can define functions by pattern matching. As an example,
consider function `processAuction` which tries to update the action state based on current
state and `msg.value`.  Pattern matching provides structural decomposition of data types through
case analysis. This ensures all possible variants are handled explicitly, eliminating
partial function hazards and providing formal guarantees of match completeness.

```
function processAuction(state) {
    match state {
    | NotStarted(reserve) =>
        require(msg.value >= reserve);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Active(currentBid, bidder) =>
        require(msg.value > currentBid);
        transferFunds(bidder, currentBid);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Cancelled =>
        revert();
    |   _ =>

>         return state;

Reviewer: Actually, doesn't `_` defeat the exhaustiveness check? The text above says "This ensures all possible variants are handled explicitly", but with this you can define a new variant and not handle it at all.

    }
}
```

### High-order functions

Functions possess first-class status within the type system, enabling their use
as parameters, return values, and assignable entities. This facilitates the
implementation of higher-order functions and functional composition patterns,
enhancing language expressivity.

As an example of a high-order function, let's consider `map_pair`
that takes two functions and applies them to the corresponding
components of a pair:

```
forall T1 T2 U1 U2 . function map_pair (pair : (T1, T2), f1 : (T1) -> U1, f2: (T2) -> U2) -> (T2,U2) {
    match pair {
    | (t1,t2) =>
        return (f1(t1), f2(t2));
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Any suggestions?

> ```

Reviewer 2: updated with the bool packing example we discussed in chat.

### Type inference

Core Solidity uses type inference algorithm to reduce syntactic verbosity while
maintaining the strong static typing guarantees. The type inference occurs
during compilation and provides complete type safety without explicit annotations. As an example, consider the following code snippet in Classic Solidity:

```
function adjustBalance(
    uint256 initialBalance,
    uint256 depositAmount,
    uint256 withdrawalAmount,
    uint256 feeAmount
) public pure returns (uint256, uint256) {
    uint256 totalDeposits = depositAmount;
    uint256 totalWithdrawals = withdrawalAmount + feeAmount;
    uint256 balanceAfterDeposit = initialBalance + totalDeposits;
    uint256 netChange = totalDeposits - totalWithdrawals;
    uint256 finalBalance = balanceAfterDeposit - totalWithdrawals;
    uint256 totalChanges = totalDeposits + totalWithdrawals;
    return (finalBalance, totalChanges);
}
```

All local variables and function arguments and result needs to specify
their type. In Core Solidity, thanks to type inference, we could
completely omit type annotations, while keeping the guarantees about
the code type safety.

```

> function adjustBalance(initialBalance, depositAmount, withdrawalAmount,feeAmount) {

Reviewer 2: I don't this is a very interesting example, and I honestly find the one before clearer.

    let totalDeposits = depositAmount;
    let totalWithdrawals = withdrawalAmount + feeAmount;
    let balanceAfterDeposit = initialBalance + totalDeposits;
    let netChange = totalDeposits - totalWithdrawals;
    let finalBalance = balanceAfterDeposit - totalWithdrawals;
    let totalChanges = totalDeposits + totalWithdrawals;
    return (finalBalance, totalChanges);
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This list was very helpful. The inference section now uses a few of them as illustrative examples.

Type inference can avoid the need of coercions on array literal expressions,
which are necessary in Classic Solidity. As an example, consider the following
definition in Classic:

```
uint[3] memory a = [1, 2, 3];
```

The declaration is rejected by the compiler, which returns the following error message:

```
Error: Type uint8[3] memory is not implicitly convertible to expected type uint256[3] memory.
```

The reason of this error is the fact that Classic Solidity uses as the base type of the array
the type of the first expression on the list and it tries to implicit convert all other elements
to this type. The compiler emits a type error when such coercion is not possible. In order to
the previous definition be accepted, we need to add a type coercion to the array first element

> as follows:

Reviewer 2: updated the wording here, is it accurate now?

> as follows:

Reviewer: Seems to be the latter. I.e. smallest one that can fit any element.

Text looks fine now.

access to memory. Some key design questions that remain open relate to the degree to which we will
support access to memory at compile time, the need for compile time specific primitives (e.g. string
concatenation / hashing), as well as the need for reflection.

We want to make sure the needs of the community are met here. Please feel free to reach out
The Solidity Forum, or our Matrix channel if you have concrete use cases in mind for
this feature.

We will publish more once we have a concrete design / prototype implementation.

## SAIL, Desugaring and the Standard Library

Desugaring is the process of translating high-level language constructs into
a semantically equivalent form using language's more primitive features.
Some of the Core Solidity new high-level constructs will be translated
into a intermediate language called SAIL - Solidity Algebraic Intermediate
Language. Anonymous functions, assignments, contracts, indexed and storage
access are examples of high-level Core Solidity features with are translated
into SAIL. The SAIL language is a typed programming language featuring
generics, typeclasses, algebraic data types and pattern matchings and it

> serves as a high-level intermediate step between Core Solidity and Yul.

Reviewer: I think this would be clearer in reverse order. I'd first say what SAIL is and emphasize that the features mentioned in the previous section are in both Core Solidity and SAIL. Only then say that the rest is sugar. Having a grasp on what isn't sugar is necessary to understand what the sugar is.

Reviewer 2: This section has been significantly reworked, how do you find it now?

As an example of one translation steps, let's see how assignments to
contract state variables are translated into SAIL constructs. Consider the
following simple contract which updates the value of state variable
named `counter`:

```
contract Counter {
    counter : word;

    function main() -> word {
        counter += 42;
        return counter;
    }
}
```

During the compilation of the previous code piece, the assignment `counter += 42`
is desugared into:

```
Assign.assign(Lvalue(counter_sel), Num.add(Rvalue(counter_sel), 42))
```

The addition infix operator is translated into function `add`, defined by a
type class `Num`. Access of the state variable `counter` is done by functions
`Lvalue` and `Rvalue`, which retrieve the storage pointer and the current
value for the `counter` variable; and function `Assign.assign` updates
the storage using the pointer and the value returned by the addition
operation. The complete code for this desugaring step is as follows:

```
contract Counter {
    function main () -> word {
        Assign.assign(Lvalue(counter_sel), Num.add(Rvalue(counter_sel), 42));

>         return Rvalue(counter_sel);

Reviewer: What's `counter_sel` and where it is defined? I expected this to desugar to a fixed address based on storage layout, but this looks like a variable declared elsewhere. The name is also quite cryptic (sel = selector? makes no sense).

Reviewer 2: this example has been removed entirely. explaining `counter_sel` is non trivial. I replaced it with the abi.encode example.

syntax. After quite some internal discussion and considering user feedback, the current feeling
within the team is that we would prefer to prioritize smoothing the transition over introducing
(subjectively) cleaner syntax.

With that said, some degree of breakage may still be required. Right now we are considering the
following changes:

- Postfix types: Supporting the kind of rich types that Core enables with a prefix syntax is quite
  challenging from a parser implementation point of view. Certain use cases may not be possible at
  all, and those that are may require complex lookahead or backtracking logic. A final decision here
  will not be made until we have completed a deeper analysis of the tradeoffs.
- Ternary operator: Changes may be required here to resolve ambiguities in the language grammar.
- Function type / parameter syntax: The introduction of higher order functions and the more
  functional flavour of Core lends itself much more to the usage of function parameters. While likely not
  strictly necessary for parsing / grammar reasons, we suspect that a simpler syntax here will likely

>   be worth the change given the benefits to readability and usability.

Reviewer: "parameter syntax" sounds confusing here. I think you mean functions passed as parameters to other functions but it sounds as if you were talking about the syntax for defining function parameters.

gather feedback and make any necessary changes.

Once we are feeling confident that the prototype is stable, work will split into two parallel
phases:

1. Production implementation: we will reimplement the typechecker, desugaring and code generation
   passes in a systems language (e.g. Rust, C++, Zig), and integrate it into solc proper. This
   implementation will focus on correctness, performance, and providing the best possible
   diagnostics and error messages.
2. Executable Formal Semantics: we will work to mechanize our existing latex specification in a
   theorem proving environment (likely Lean). We intend to use this definition to prove key
   invariants about the typesystem itself, as well as the standard library. It will also be used
   to build confidence in the production implementation as a differential fuzzing target.

Once the production implementation is relatively stable. There will be a period of time in which
Core Solidity is available as an experimental feature, but not yet marked as production ready. We
will use this period to gain real world feedback from our users, continue fuzzing, and put the

> standard library out for external review. When we are confident that the new pipeline is free of

Reviewer: We're calling it a frontend all over the place though, including the "Road to Core Solidity" post. It's not precise, but I think it conveys the meaning much better. Calling it a pipeline is much more confusing, because the way we use it most often (to distinguish between evmasm and IR), it actually does not include the frontend part at all.

feel are required to keep up with the ever increasing scale of systems being developed in Solidity.

Core Solidity is our solution. It is a rebuild of the Solidity type system and compiler front/middle end that will:

- introduce powerful new features (generics, traits, algebraic datatypes, pattern matching, compile-time evaluation)
- provide a strong foundation for compiler correctness as we continue to extend the language in the future
- empower library authors and support a community-driven process for language evolution
- expand the capabilities of verification and analysis tooling

In addition to growing and expanding the language, we will also be removing or reworking some
existing features. We are already certain that we will be removing inheritance entirely. Additional
changes are less certain, but we are considering potentially replacing or reworking features
like try/catch, libraries, function pointers, type conversion, and reference semantics.

We currently have a working prototype for Core Solidity. Most of the examples in this post typecheck
and can produce executable code (although some make use of speculative syntax or unimplemented

> language constructs). Much of the core type theory is stable, but we want to add at least compile

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and can produce executable code. Some examples make use of yet to be implemented syntax and will compile in the future. Much of the core type theory is stable, but we want to add at least compile
```

time evaluation and modules before we will consider the type system finalized. Extensive work
remains to build out the standard library and reach feature parity with Classic Solidity.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

While the prototype is in a working state, it is not optimized for user experience. We are actively working on the prototype and new features will be incrementally made available on [the project's repository](https://github.com/argotorg/solcore) for feedback and experimentation. We are looking forward to your feedback.

```

## A Note on Syntax

Most of the work to date has been focused on the design and implementation of the type system, and
associated code generation pipeline down to Yul. In order to avoid getting bogged down in
bikeshedding around syntax, and with the desire to validate our core ideas with a working
implementation as soon as possible, we moved ahead with a provisional syntax. You can expect
extensive changes before release. Our current intention is to eventually match the syntax of Classic
Solidity as much as possible. For any new syntax, you should expect that the final version will feel
closer to languages like TypeScript or Rust than it does right now.

## New Language Features

Core Solidity takes ideas from pure functional programming languages (e.g. Haskell, Lean), as well
as modern systems languages (e.g. Rust, Zig). We are extending Solidity with the following new
features:

> - Algebraic datatypes (a.k.a sum / product types) and pattern matching

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Algebraic datatypes (also known as sum / product types) and pattern matching
```

- Generics / parametric polymorphism
- Traits / typeclasses
- Type inference
- Higher order and anonymous functions
- Compile time evaluation

We think that taken together these core primitives will enable developers to produce stronger

> abstractions, write more modular and reusable code, and leverage the type system to enforce core

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
abstractions, write more modular and reusable code, and leverage the type system to enforce
```

safety properties.

We will continue to support the kind of low level access to the EVM that is often required by
production implementations: assembly will remain a core primitive, and we will extend it with the
ability to directly call functions from the high level language in assembly blocks. Users will be

> able to disable the languages built in abstractions (e.g. contract dispatch generation, ABI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
production implementations: assembly will remain a core primitive, and we will extend assembly blocks with the ability to directly call functions defined in the high level language. Users will be
able to disable the languages built in abstractions (e.g. contract dispatch generation, ABI
```

decoding, default storage layout generation), following the "pay for what you use" philosophy of
languages like Rust and C++.

### Algebraic data types and pattern matching

Algebraic Data Types provide a principled foundation for data modeling through the composition of
sum and product types. Sum types represent exclusive alternatives: a value inhabits exactly one
variant. Product types combine multiple values into structured tuples. These two primitives can
be combined to define precise types that make invalid states completely

> unrepresentable, allowing the type system to enforce core program invariants entirely at

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
unrepresentable, allowing the type system to enforce invariants entirely at
```

compile time.

Lets start with a very simple type:

```solidity
data Bool = True | False
```

Types are sets of values. The left hand side of the above statement defines the name of a new type
(`Bool`), and the right hand side defines the set of allowed values of the `Bool` type (`True` or
`False`). The `|` operator lets us introduce new alternative value constructors.

Alternatives can also hold values. This lets us implement the same kind of patterns as [User Defined
Value Types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) would in

> Classic Solidity. We can consider a simple 18 decimal fixed point (a `wad`):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We can also use ADTs to implement the same kind of patterns as [User Defined
Value Types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) in
Classic Solidity. We can consider a simple 18 decimal fixed point (a `wad`):
```

```solidity
data wad = wad(uint256)
```

The `wad` type has a single value constructor: `wad` (type names and value constructors live in
separate namespaces and so can share names) that holds a `uint256` as it's underlying
representation. Simple wrapper types like this will be erased by the compiler during the translation
into Yul, meaning that `wad` has the exact same runtime representation as a `uint256`.

> Now we can define a type safe fixed point multiplication routine. We will need to extract the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now we can define a type-safe fixed-point multiplication routine. We will need to extract the
```

compiler, ensuring that every possible state is handled exactly once.

```solidity
function processAuction(state: State) -> State {
    match state {
    | NotStarted(reserve) =>
        require(msg.value >= reserve);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Active(currentBid, bidder) =>
        require(msg.value > currentBid);
        transferFunds(bidder, currentBid);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | _ => return state;
    }
}
```

### Generics and type classes

Core Solidity introduces two new mechanisms for code sharing and polymorphism: generics and
type classes.

Generics implement parametric polymorphism: they enable us to write functions and data structures
that behave in a uniform way for all types. As an example, we can define a polymorphic `identity`
function:

```solidity
forall T . function identity(x : T) -> T {
    return x;
}
```

We can also define generic types, like this this `Result` type that is parameterised by the type of
the payload in the error case:

```solidity
data Result(T) = Ok | Err(T)
```

Generics are powerful, but by themselves quite limited. Most interesting operations are not defined

> for all types. Type classes (a.k.a Traits) are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for all types. Type classes are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type
```

> for all types. Type classes (a.k.a Traits) are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Generics are powerful, but by themselves quite limited. Most interesting operations do not have a uniform definition for all types. Type classes (a.k.a Traits) are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type
```

specific implementation for the same function name, and when combined with class constraints let us

> define generic functions that are polymorphic over a restricted subset of types.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Generics are powerful, but by themselves quite limited. Most interesting operations do not have a uniform type definition. Type classes (in Rust known as traits) are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type
specific implementation for the same function name, and when combined with class constraints let us
define generic functions that are polymorphic over a restricted subset of types.
```

A type class is simply an interface specification. Consider the following definition of a class of
types that can be multiplied:

```solidity
forall T . class T:Mul {
    function mul(lhs : T, rhs : T) -> T;
}
```

Instead of the concrete `wmul` function that we defined above for our `wad` fixed point type, it

> would be more idiomatic to defined an instance (a.k.a `impl`) of the `Mul` type class for `wad`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Instead of the concrete `wmul` function that we defined above for our `wad` fixed point type, it
is more idiomatic to define an instance (known in Rust as `impl`) of the `Mul` type class for `wad`.
```

(giving us a uniform syntax for multiplication across all types, and allowing us to use our `wad`

> type in functions that are generic over any instance of the `wad` type class):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This gives us a uniform syntax for multiplication across all types, and allows us to use our `wad`
type in functions that are generic over any instance of the `Mul` type class:
```

> type in functions that are generic over any instance of the `wad` type class):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Instead of the concrete `wmul` function that we defined above for our `wad` fixed point type, it
is more idiomatic to define an instance (a.k.a `impl`) of the `Mul` type class for `wad`. This gives us a uniform syntax for multiplication across all types, and allows us to use our `wad`
type in functions that are generic over any instance of the `wad` type class:
```

effectively an associated type (although for any type system nerds reading, we implement it using a
restricted form of functional dependencies). To put it more plainly, we can only implement a single
instance of `Typedef` for `wad`: the compiler would not allow us to implement both
`wad:Typedef(uint256)` and `wad:Typedef(uint128)`. This restriction makes type inference much more
predictable and reliable by sidestepping many of the potential ambiguities inherent to full
multi-parameter type classes.

For a real world example of how generics and type class constraints can be used to eliminate
boilerplate or repetitive code, compare the combinatorial explosion of overloads required for the
[`console.log` implementation](https://github.com/foundry-rs/forge-std/blob/master/src/console.sol)
in `forge-std` to the following generic Core Solidity function that covers the functionality of all
the single argument overloads from the original library. The `word` type used in this implementation
is a low level type that represents a Yul variable, and is the only type that can be passed into or
out of assembly blocks.

```solidity

> forall T . T:ABIEncode => function log(val : T) {

Reviewer 4: in the future it would be cool to show how many LoC we save by having this vs the current forge implementation

        )
    }
}
```

Similarly to Rust and Lean, all invocations of type classes and generic functions are fully
monomorphized at compile time, meaning polymorphic functions do not incur a runtime overhead when
compared to fully concrete functions. While this does mean that the compiled EVM code will
potentially contain multiple specialized versions of the same generic function, this does not entail
a binary size overhead compared to Classic Solidity which would anyway require multiple function
definitions for equivalent functionality. We consider this to be the correct tradeoff for our
domain.

### Higher-order and anonymous functions

Functions possess first-class status within the type system, enabling their use
as parameters, return values, and assignable entities.

As an example, consider the following which implements a custom ABI decoding
of a triple of booleans from a single `word` value:

```solidity
forall T . function unpack_bools(bools : word, fn : (bool, bool, bool) -> T) -> T {
    let b0 : bool = toBool(and(bools, 0x1));
    let b1 : bool = toBool(and(shr(1, bools), 0x1));
    let b2 : bool = toBool(and(shr(2, bools), 0x1));
    return fn(b0, b1, b2);

> }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
forall T . function unpack_bools(fn : (bool, bool, bool) -> T) -> ((word) -> T) {
    return lam (bools : word) -> {
        let b0 : bool = toBool(and(bools, 0x1));
        let b1 : bool = toBool(and(shr(1, bools), 0x1));
        let b2 : bool = toBool(and(shr(2, bools), 0x1));
        return fn(b0, b1, b2);
    };
}
```

```

Function `unpack_bools` extracts three individual boolean values from the lowest three bits
of a packed `word` (`bools`). It treats it as a bitmask where the least significant bit
(position 0) represents `b0`, the next bit (position 1) represents `b1`, and the third bit
(position 2) represents `b2`. After extracting these bits and converting them to booleans,
it passes them as arguments to a callback function `fn` and returns whatever result
that function produces.

We also support the definition of (non-recursive) anonymous functions using the `lam` keyword.
Functions defined in this way can capture values available in the defining scope. As an example
consider this testing utility that counts the number of times an arbitrary function is called:

```solidity

> forall function count_calls(fn : (T) -> U) -> (memory(word), (T) -> U) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
forall T . function count_calls(fn : (T) -> U) -> (memory(word), (T) -> U) {
```

Author: Fixed by adding `forall T U .` to the signature.

> forall T U . function count_calls(fn : (T) -> U) -> (memory(word), (T) -> U) {

Reviewer 4: maybe memoization?

    let counter : memory(word) = allocate(32);
    return (counter, lam (a : T) -> {
        counter += 1;
        return fn(a);
    });
}
```

Our implementation here is similar to systems languages like Rust and C++: the compiler produces a
unique type for each anonymous function that contains the captured state, and these unique types are

> made callable by making them instances of the built in `invokable` type class (similar to the `Fn`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
made callable by making them instances of the `invokable` type class (similar to the [`Fn`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Fn.html)
```

> trait in Rust). This approach avoids the kind of dynamic heap based environment management used in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
trait in Rust). This approach is runtime gas efficient.```

> higher level languages like Haskell or Python.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

### Type inference

Core Solidity supports the inference of types in almost any position. Annotations are usually optional and

> need be added only where considered desirable for readability or understanding. Inference is decidable,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Core Solidity supports the inference of types in almost any position. Annotations are usually only
needed when considered desirable for readability or understanding. Inference is decidable,
```

> and the situations in which ambiguities requiring annotation can occur are very limited. This lets

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
need be added only where considered desirable for readability or understanding. This lets
```

us solve a lot of the syntactic clutter required when writing Solidity today. As an example,

> consider the following Classic Solidity definition:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
us solve a lot of the syntactic clutter required when writing Solidity today.
```

```solidity
struct LendingPosition {
    uint256 collateralDeposited;
    uint256 debtIssued;
    uint256 lastUpdated;
}
```

Instantiating `LendingPosition` in Classic Solidity is syntactically clunky, requiring us
to both annotate the type and invoke the `LendingPosition` constructor:

```solidity
LendingPosition memory emptyPosition = LendingPosition(0, 0, block.timestamp);
```

Since we are using the `LendingPosition` constructor, the compiler can infer
the type of `emptyPosition`. Core Solidity allows us to omit the redundant annotation:

```solidity
let emptyPosition = LendingPosition(0, 0, block.timestamp);

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Assigning an expression to a variable in Classic can often result in redundant annotation if those
types are already present in the expression being assigned:

```solidity

> (uint256 a, uint256 b) = abi.decode(input, (uint256, uint256))

Reviewer: The repetitiveness would be even more apparent IMO if you used something that has a location, e.g.:

```suggestion
(bytes memory a, bytes memory b) = abi.decode(input, (bytes, bytes))
```

```

The same definition is much cleaner in Core:

```solidity
let (a, b) = abi.decode(input, (uint256, uint256))
```

Another common frustration with Classic Solidity is the syntactic noise required when defining array
literals. Consider the following snippet:

```Solidity
uint256[3] memory a = [1, 2, 3];
```

> This declaration is rejected by the compiler with the following error message:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This declaration is rejected by the Classic Solidity compiler with the following error message:
```

```
Error: Type uint8[3] memory is not implicitly convertible to expected type uint256[3] memory.
```

> Classic Solidity implements a limited and special cased form of type inference for numeric array

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The underlying reason for this error is that Classic Solidity implements a [limited and special cased form of type inference](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#array-literals) for array
```

literals: it selects the smallest possible element type that can represent every element of the
array (in this case `uint8`). The compiler then throws a type error when attempting to assign this

> value to a variable with a different type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
value to a variable with an incompatible type.
```

> In order for the previous definition be accepted, we can add a type coercion to the first array element:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order for the previous definition be accepted, we can add an unintuitive type coercion to the first array element:
```

### Compile Time Evaluation

We do not yet have a prototype implementation of compile time evaluation, so don't have concrete
examples to share here yet. We are however very convinced that this will be a particularly valuable
extension to the language and consider it a critical feature that needs to be in place before
release. A strong goal is to minimize the differences between the runtime and compile time variants
of the language, allowing for a familiar syntax and code sharing between the two contexts.

Non-trivial design and implementation work remains here. We are exploring the degree to which access
to memory at compile time is required, and if it is, what kind of analysis passes we would want to
implement to guard against accidental leakage of references to compile time memory. We are also
investigating what kind of compile time specific primitives we might want to add, and whether we
want to expand the languages capabilities around reflection.

We will publish more on our designs once they stabilise. We want to make sure the needs of the
community are met here: if you have concrete real world use cases in mind for this feature, we would
be very interested to hear them.

> ## SAIL, Desugaring and the Standard Library

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## SAIL, Desugaring, and the Standard Library
```

In addition to expanding the surface language, the transition to Core Solidity will also introduce a
new user accessible mid level IR: SAIL (Solidity Algebraic Intermediate Language). This is the
"Core" in Core Solidity. It's the most minimal language we could conceive of that would let us

> express the full range of high-level language constructs found in Classic Solidity. It can usefully

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
"Core" in Core Solidity. It's the most minimal language that lets us
express the full range of high-level language constructs found in Classic Solidity. It can usefully
```

> be thought of as Yul with generics and type classes. It consists of the following primitive constructs:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
express the full range of high-level language constructs found in Classic Solidity. It consists of the following primitive constructs:
```

- Functions
- Contracts
- Assembly (Yul) blocks
- Simple variable introduction and assignment
- A short circuiting if-then-else expression
- Algebraic datatypes & pattern matching

> - Typeclasses

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Type classes
```

- Generics

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

A SAIL variable is conceptually the same as a [Yul variable](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#variable-declarations). The compiler will associate an EVM stack slot to it.
```

> It has a single builtin type (`word`) that has the same range of values as a Classic Solidity

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
SAIL has a single builtin type (`word`) that has the same range of values as a Classic Solidity
```

`bytes32` or `uint256`, and can semantically can be viewed as "an item on stack" or "a yul
variable". Contracts in SAIL are very low level (essentially just a runtime entrypoint and initcode
entrypoint).

Although our current implementation uses Yul as an assembly language, this choice is largely
arbitrary from a theoretical standpoint, and it could also be instantiated over e.g. a RISCV based
assembly language instead.

> We believe that SAIL is expressive enough that we can implement all other high level language

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We are confident that SAIL is expressive enough that we can implement all high level language
```

> features and type as a combination of standard library definitions and desugaring passes (compile

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
features and types as a combination of standard library definitions and desugaring passes, i.e. compile
```

> time syntactic transformations into SAIL primitives). Core Solidity is then simply SAIL extended

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
time syntactic transformations into SAIL primitives. Core Solidity is then SAIL extended
```

with additional syntax sugar and libraries. It is similar to Yul in its dual function as both a compiler
IR and a user facing low level language, and the full range of SAIL primitives will be directly

> available when writing Core Solidity. This style of language construction is often used in other

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
time syntactic transformations into SAIL primitives). The full range of SAIL primitives will be directly
available when writing Core Solidity, which is then simply SAIL extended
with additional syntax sugar and libraries. This style of language construction is often used in other
```

high assurance domains (e.g. theorem provers), and we believe it has important benefits for both
users of the language and the safety and security of it's implementation.

SAIL is simple enough that we expect to be able to construct an executable formal semantics for it.
This will allow us to mathematically guarantee core properties of the Solidity type system, provide

> a reference implementation for differential fuzzing of the production implementation, and formally

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a reference implementation for differential fuzzing, and formally
```

an essential part of our correctness story as both the language and the scale of the systems it is
used to construct continue to grow.

Library authors will have (almost) the same expressive power as the language designers, and will
be able to create abstractions that feel built-in to the language itself (a "library-based
language"). It will be possible to define and use alternative standard library implementations, or
disable the standard library completely. With the standard library disabled, it will be possible to
write Core Solidity code with almost the same level of control as low level assembly languages like
Yul or Huff, but with a modern, expressive type system, based on a mathematically rigorous foundation.

We also expect that the introduction of SAIL will make it much easier for Solidity users to extend
and improve the language. In many cases it will be possible to make deep improvements via a pull
request to the standard library alone. When new syntax or desugaring passes are required, we expect
them to be much easier to prototype and specify in SAIL without requiring knowledge and

> understanding of compiler internals. We hope that SAIL and Core Solidity will allow us transition to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
understanding of compiler internals. We hope that SAIL and Core Solidity will allow us to transition to
```

> a community driven RFC style process for changes to the high level language and standard library.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a community driven RFC-style process for changes to the high-level language and standard library.
```

### A Userspace `abi.encode`

One instructive example is the Core Solidity implementation of `abi.encode`. This is a complicated
and highly generic function that is currently provided as a compiler builtin. A full in language
implementation would not be possible in Classic Solidity due to the recursive nature of the ABI
specification (and the resulting infinite number of expressible types). The implementation presented
here is relatively concise, but does make use of some more advanced patterns and features. We
want to emphasise that existing users of Solidity will be able to be productive and make use of
their existing knowledge without having to concern themselves with these kind of low level internal
details. We hope that expert level users and library authors will however be excited by the new
potentials these features enable.

#### `uint256`

To begin we will construct the type `uint256`. In Classic Solidity the definition of this type and
it's associated operations are all built in language constructs. In Core, it is defined entirely in
language as a simple wrapper around a `word`. We also define a `Typedef` instance for it:

> 

Reviewer 4: add a link back to the section explaining ADTs

```solidity
data uint256 = uint256(word);

instance uint256:Typedef(word) {
    function abs(w: word) -> uint256 {
        return uint256(w);
    }

    function rep(x: uint256) -> word {
        match x {
        | uint256(w) => return w;
        }
    }
}
```

#### `memory` and `bytes`

Similarly we can build types that represent pointers into the various EVM data regions by again wrapping a
`word`. Notice that in the following snippet the type parameter on the memory pointer is *phantom*
(i.e. it appears only in the type, but is not mentioned in any of the value constructors). This is a

> common idiom in ML family languages like Haskell or Rust that lets us enforce compile-time

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
common idiom in [ML family languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:ML_programming_language_family) like Haskell or Rust that lets us enforce compile-time
```

only SAIL primitives.

```solidity
data bytes;
```

Notice that in this construction of pointers and data locations, the data location is attached to
the type (instead of the variable binding as it is in Classic), allowing for the definition of e.g.
memory structures containing references to storage.

#### The `Proxy` type

The last piece of machinery required for `abi.encode` is the `Proxy` type:

```solidity
data Proxy(T) = Proxy;
```

As with the `memory` definition, the type parameter here is phantom, but unlike memory `Proxy`
carries no additional information at runtime. It exists only as a marker type that lets us pass
information around at compile time. Types like this are completely zero cost (i.e. they are
completely erased at runtime and do appear in the final compiled program at all).

Although somewhat esoteric, `Proxy` is very useful and gives us a lot of control over type inference
and instance selection without needing to pass data at runtime where it is not needed. It is often
used in both Haskell (where it is also called `Proxy`) and Rust (`std::marker::PhantomData`).

#### `abi.encode`

> Now we are ready to implement Classic Solidity's `abi.encode` in SAIL. We start by defining a

Reviewer: I'd clarify from the start that we're not doing a full `abi.encode()`, but rather a simplified version just for `uint256`.

Author: Function `abi_encode` is valid for any type which is an instance of `ABIEncode` class: 

```
forall T . T:ABIEncode => function abi_encode(val : T) -> memory(bytes) {
....
}
```

        return tail;
    }
}
```

Finally we can define a top_level `abi_encode` function that handles the initial memory allocation
and free memory pointer updates (we have omitted the implementation of the low level
`get_free_memory` and `set_free_memory` helpers for the sake of brevity):

```solidity
// top level encoding function.
// abi encodes an instance of `ty` and returns a pointer to the result
forall T . T:ABIEncode => function abi_encode(val : T) -> memory(bytes) {
    let free = get_free_memory();
    let headSize = ABIAttribs.headSize(Proxy : Proxy(ty));
    let tail = ABIEncode.encodeInto(val, free, 0, Add.add(free, headSize));
    set_free_memory(tail);
    return memory(free);
}
```

## Compatibility and Interoperability

Introducing such a major revision to any programming language is challenging. While a certain degree
of breakage is inevitable (and even desired), we want to make the transition as smooth as possible
and avoid a split in the language.

As with previous breaking upgrades to Solidity, ABI compatibility will be maintained between
versions, allowing individual contracts written in incompatible versions to interoperate and live

> side by side in the same project (this strategy is also used by Rust with their "Editions" feature).

Reviewer 2: I thought we would accept different versions in the same solc version?

## New Language Features

Core Solidity takes ideas from pure functional programming languages (e.g. Haskell, Lean), as well
as modern systems languages (e.g. Rust, Zig). We are extending Solidity with the following new
features:

- Algebraic datatypes (a.k.a sum / product types) and pattern matching
- Generics / parametric polymorphism
- Traits / typeclasses
- Type inference
- Higher order and anonymous functions
- Compile time evaluation

We think that taken together these core primitives will enable developers to produce stronger
abstractions, write more modular and reusable code, and leverage the type system to enforce core
safety properties.

We will continue to support the kind of low level access to the EVM that is often required by
production implementations: assembly will remain a core primitive, and we will extend it with the
ability to directly call functions from the high level language in assembly blocks. Users will be
able to disable the languages built in abstractions (e.g. contract dispatch generation, ABI
decoding, default storage layout generation), following the "pay for what you use" philosophy of
languages like Rust and C++.

> ### Algebraic data types and pattern matching

Reviewer 2: This section uses alternative and value constructer pretty interchangeably. I don't know if we should settle on one?

Algebraic Data Types provide a principled foundation for data modeling through the composition of
sum and product types. Sum types represent exclusive alternatives: a value inhabits exactly one
variant. Product types combine multiple values into structured tuples. The combination of these two
primitives allows for the construction of precise types that can make invalid states completely
unrepresentable, allowing the type system to guarantee core program invariants entirely at
compile time.

Lets start with a very simple type:

```solidity
data Bool = True | False
```

Types are sets of values. The left hand side of the above statement defines the name of a new type
(`Bool`), and the right hand side defines the set of allowed values of the `Bool` type (`True` or

> `False`). The `|` lets us introduce new alternative value constructors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`False`). The `|` operator lets us introduce new alternative value constructors.
```

Alternatives can also hold values. This lets us implement the same kind of patterns as [User Defined
Value Types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) would in
Classic Solidity. We can consider a simple 18 decimal fixed point (a `wad`):

```solidity

> data wad = wad(uint256)

Reviewer 2: Note for those unfamiliar that the `wad` name is fairly common for an 18 decimal fixed point and is used by both [solady](https://github.com/Vectorized/solady/blob/main/src/utils/FixedPointMathLib.sol) and [solmate](https://github.com/transmissions11/solmate/blob/main/src/utils/FixedPointMathLib.sol). We can switch to a more descriptive ABDK / prbmath style naming if people have strong opinions, but I personally find `wad` a little cleaner and less cluttered.

        require(msg.value >= reserve);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | Active(currentBid, bidder) =>
        require(msg.value > currentBid);
        transferFunds(bidder, currentBid);
        return Active(msg.value, msg.sender);
    | _ => return state;
    }
}
```

### Generics and type classes

Core Solidity introduces two new mechanisms for code sharing and polymorphism: generics and
type classes.

Generics implement parametric polymorphism: they enable us to write functions and data structures
that behave in a uniform way for all types. As an example, we can define a polymorphic `identity`
function:

```solidity
forall T . function identity(x : T) -> T {
    return x;
}
```

We can also define generic types, like this this `Result` type that is parameterised by the type of
the payload in the error case:

```solidity
data Result(T) = Ok | Err(T)
```

Generics are powerful, but by themselves quite limited. Most interesting operations are not defined
for all types. Type classes (a.k.a Traits) are the solution: they let us define an overloaded type
specific implementation for the same function name, and when combined with class constraints let us

> define generic functions that are polymorphic over a restricted subset of types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for all types. Type classes (a.k.a Traits) are the solution: they let us define overloaded type
specific implementations for the same function name, and when combined with class constraints let us
define generic functions that are polymorphic over a restricted subset of types.
```

type in functions that are generic over any instance of the `wad` type class):

```solidity
instance wad:Mul {
    function mul(lhs : wad, rhs : wad) {
        return wmul(lhs, rhs);
    }
}
```

If we want to write a function that can accept any type that is an instance of `Mul` we need to add
a constraint to the signature:

```solidity
forall T . T:Mul => function square(val : T) -> T {
    return Mul.mul(val, val);
}
```

Simple wrapper types like `wad` are very common, and one type class that can be particularly helpful
when working with them is `Typedef`:

```solidity
forall T U . class T:Typedef(U) {
    function abs(x:T) -> U;
    function rep(x:U) -> T;
}
```

The `abs` (abstraction) and `rep` (representation) functions let us move between wrapper types and
their underlying types in a generic way and without the syntactic noise of having to introduce
pattern matching every time we want to unwrap a type. The instance for `wad` would look like this:

```solidity
instance wad:Typedef(uint256) {
    function abs(u: uint256) -> wad {
        return wad(u);
    }

    function rep(x: wad) -> uint256 {
        match x {
        | wad(u) => return u;
        }
    }
}
```

> Note that `U` parameter in the above `Typedef` definition is "weak": its value is uniquely

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that parameters that appear after the class name like `U` in the above `Typedef` definition are "weak": their value is uniquely
```

to postfix types). We are also considering reworking or replacing some features that have proven to
be problematic or limiting in practice (e.g. try/catch, libraries, function pointers, data
locations). Users can expect that some moderate changes may be required to adapt their code that
makes use of these features. Code that makes heavy use of inheritance will of course require the
largest changes.

We will be investigating the potential for automated upgrades, and if reliable and robust
implementations are possible expect to ship such tools at release.

Avoiding a Python 2 -> Python 3 style split is top of mind, and we believe that upgrades should be
manageable and that it will be possible to carry them out in an incremental manner.

## The Road to Production

This section outlines our current thinking on achieving production readiness and our strategy for
making such deep changes to the language in a safe way. Please note that this is a tentative plan,
and may be subject to extensive change. We are not yet in a position where we feel confident about
committing to concrete timelines. We will provide more detailed roadmaps and concrete timelines as

> we get closer to a production implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and may be subject to extensive change. We are not yet in a position where we feel confident about
committing to concrete timelines. We will provide more details as
we get closer to a production implementation.
```

maintaining the strong static typing guarantees. The type inference occurs
during compilation and provides complete type safety without explicit annotations,
which are required in Classic Solidity. As an example, consider the following
definition in Classic:

```
bytes32 y; uint x = uint(y);
```
```
```

That demands a type annotation on `x`'s definition even when it has an explicit
cast to `uint` type. In Core Solidity we could simply define `x` without its type:

```
bytes32 y; let x = uint(y);
```

Another situation which have unnecessary annotation involves `struct` value
constructors. Consider the following `struct` definition which could be
part of some lending protocol:

```
struct LendingPosition {
    uint256 collateralDeposited;
    uint256 debtIssued;
    uint256 lastUpdated;
}
```

Creating a variable to represent an initial position would be as follows in
Classic:

```
LendingPosition memory emptyPosition = LendingPosition(0, 0, block.timestamp);
```

Since we are using the `LendingPosition` constructor, the compiler can infer
the correct type. The same definition for `emptyPosition` in Core Solidity would be:

```

> let emptyPosition = LendingPosition(0, 0, block.timestamp);

Reviewer: The Classic Solidity version is actually missing the `memory` keyword. Unless it's a storage variable.
